============================
Title : PYQ - Ancient India
Tags  : #imp
Descr :
============================



2022
link: https://compass.rauias.com/upsc-prelims/ancient-history-pyq/

Q1. With reference to Indian history, consider the following texts

  1 Nettipakarana
  2 Parishishtaparvan
  3 Avadanashataka
  4 Trishashtilakshana Mahapurana

  Which of the above are Jaina texts?

  A 1, 2 and 3 only
  B 2 and 4 only ✔
  C 1, 3 and 4 only
  D 2, 3 and 4 only


Q2. With reference to Indian history, consider the following pairs:

  Historical person      Known as

  1. Aryadeva  -  Jaina scholar
  2. Dignaga   -  Buddhist scholar ✔
  3. Nathamuni -  Vaishnava scholar ✔

  How many pairs given above are correctly matched?

  A None of the pairs
  B Only one pair
  C Only two pairs ✔
  D All three pairs


Q3. According to Kautilya's Arthashastra, which of the following are correct?

  A person could be a slave as a result of a judicial punishment.
  If a female slave bore her master a son, she was legally free.
  If a son born to a female slave was fathered by her master,
  the son was entitled to the legal status of the master's son.

  Which of the statements given above are correct?

  A 1 and 2 only
  B 2 and 3 only ✔
  C 1 and 3 only
  D 1, 2 and 3


Q4. Consider the following pairs :

  Site of *Ashoka's major rock edicts*      Location in the State of

  1. Dhauli    -  Odisha
  2. Erragudi  -  Andhra Pradesh
  3. Jaugada   -  Madhya Pradesh  (Odisha)
  4. Kalsi     -  Karnataka  (Dehradun, Uttarakhand)

  How many pairs given above are correctly matched?

  A Only one pair
  B Only two pairs ✔
  C Only three pairs
  D All four pairs


Q5. Which one of the following statements about Sangam literature in ancient South India is correct?

  A Sangam poems are devoid of any reference to material culture.
  B The social classification of Varna was known to Sangam poets. ✔
  C Sangam poems have no reference, to warrior ethic.
  D Sangam literature refers to magical forces as irrational.


2021

Q6. Which one of the following ancient towns is well-known for its elaborate system of water harvesting and management by building a series of dams and channelizing water into connected reservoirs?

  A Dholavira ✔
  B Kalibangan
  C Rakhigarhi
  D Ropar


Q7. From the decline of *Guptas* until the rise of Harshavardhana in the early seventh century, which of the following kingdoms were holding power in Northern India?

  The Guptas of Magadha
  The Paramaras of Malwa
  The Pushyabhutis of Thanesar
  The Maukharis of Kanauj
  The Yadavas of Devagiri
  The Maitrakas of Valabhi

  Select the correct answer using the code given below.

  A 1, 2 and 5 only
  B 1, 3, 4 and 6 only ✔
  C 2, 3 and 4 only
  D 5 and 6 only


Q8. Consider the following pairs:

  Historical place      Well-known for

  1. Burzahom           : Rock-cut shrines
  2. Chandra-ketugarh   : Terracotta art
  3. Ganeshwar          : Copper artefacts

  Which of the pairs given above is/are correctly matched?

  A 1 only
  B 1 and 2 only
  C 3 only
  D 2 and 3 only ✔


Q9. With reference to *Madanapalle of Andhra Pradesh*, which one of the following statements is correct? (NCERT, pre chapter)

  A Pingali Venkayya designed the tricolour Indian National Flag here.
  B Pattabhi Sitaramaiah led the Quit India Movement of Andhra region from here.
  C Rabindranath Tagore translated the National Anthem from Bengali to English here. ✔
  D Madame Blavatsky and Colonel Olcott set up headquarters of Theosophical Society first here.


Q10. With reference to the history of ancient India, which of the following statements is/are correct?

  Mitakshara was the civil law for upper castes and Dayabhaga was the civil law for lower castes.

  In the Mitakshara system, the sons can claim right to the property during the lifetime of the father,
  whereas in the Dayabhaga system, it is only after the death of the father that the sons can claim
  right to the property.

  The Mitakshara system deals with the matters related to the property held by male members only
  of a family, whereas the Dayabhaga system deals with the matters related to the property held by
  both male and female members of a family.

  Select the correct answer using the code given below.

  A 1 and 2 only
  B 2 only ✔
  C 1 and 3 only
  D 3 only

Q11. With reference to the history of ancient India, *Bhavabhuti*, *Hastimalla* and *Kshemeshvara* were famous

  A Jain monks
  B playwrights ✔
  C temple architects
  D philosophers


Q12. Which one of the following statements is correct?

  A Ajanta Caves lie in the gorge of Waghora River. ✔
  B Sanchi Stupa lies in the gorge of Chambal River.
  C Pandu-lena Cave Shrines lie in the gorge of Narmada River.
  D Amaravati Stupa lies in the gorge of Godavari River.


2020

Q13. With reference to Chausath Yogini Temple situated near Morena, consider the following statements:

  It is a circular temple built during the reign of Kachchhapaghata Dynasty.
  It is the only circular temple built in India.
  It was meant to promote the Vaishnava cult in the region.
  Its design has given rise to a popular belief that it was the inspiration
  behind the Indian Parliament building.

  Which of the statements given above are correct?

  A 1 and 2 only
  B 2 and 3 only
  C 1 and 4 only ✔
  D 2, 3 and 4 only


Q14. With reference to the cultural history of India, consider the following pairs:

  1. Parivrajaka  –  Renunciant and Wanderer
  2. Shramana     –  Priest with a high status
  3. Upasaka      –  Lay follower of Buddhism

  Which of the pairs given above are correctly matched?

  A 1 and 2 only
  B 1 and 3 only ✔
  C 2 and 3 only
  D 1, 2 and 3


Q15. With reference to the period of Gupta dynasty in ancient India,
which of the following statements is/are correct?

  A ports handling foreign trade ✔
  B capitals of powerful kingdoms
  C places of exquisite stone art and architecture
  D important Buddhist pilgrimage centres


Q16. Which of the following phrases defines the nature of the ‘Hundi’
generally referred to in the sources of the post-Harsha period?

  A An advisory issued by the king to his subordinates
  B A diary to be maintained for daily accounts
  C A bill of exchange ✔
  D An order from the feudal lord to his subordinates


Q17. With reference to the cultural history of India,
which one of the following is the correct description of the term '*paramitas*'?

  A The earliest Dharmashastra texts written in aphoristic (sutra) style
  B Philosophical schools that did not accept the authority of Vedas
  C Perfections whose attainment led to the Bodhisattva path ✔
  D Powerful merchant guilds of early medieval South India


Q18. With reference to the scholars/litterateurs of ancient India,
consider the following statements:

  Panini is associated with Pushyamitra Shunga.
  Amarasimha is associated with Harshavardhana.
  Kalidasa is associated with Chandra Gupta - II.

  Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

  A 1 and 2 only
  B 2 and 3 only
  C 3 only ✔
  D 1, 2 and 3


Q19. With reference to the religious history of India,
consider the following statements:

  Sthaviravadins belong to Mahayana Buddhism.
  Lokottaravadin sect was an offshoot of Mahasanghika sect of Buddhism.
  The deification of Buddha by Mahasanghikas fostered the Mahayana Buddhism.

  Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

  A 1 and 2 only
  B 2 and 3 only ✔
  C 3 only
  D 1, 2 and 3


Q20. Consider the following events in the history of India:

  Rise of Pratiharas under King Bhoja
  Establishment of Pallava power under Mahendravarman – 1
  Establishment of Chola power by Parantaka – 1
  Pala dynasty founded by Gopala

  What is the correct chronological order of the above events,
  starting from the earliest time?

  A 2-1-4-3
  B 3-1-4-2
  C 2-4-1-3 ✔
  D 3-4-1-2

Q21. With reference to the history of India, the terms "*kulyavapa*" and "*dronavapa*" denote

  A measurement of land ✔
  B coins of different monetary value
  C classification of urban land
  D religious rituals


Q22. Who among the following rulers advised his subjects through this inscription?

  "Whosoever praises his religious sect or blames other sects out of excessive
  devotion to his own sect, with the view of glorifying his own sect, he rather
  injures his own sect very severely."

  A Ashoka ✔
  B Samudragupta
  C Harshavardhana
  D Krishnadeva Raya


Q23. With reference to the history of India, consider the following pairs:

  Famous Place     Present State

  1. Bhilsa        –  Madhya Pradesh
  2. Dwarasamudra  –  Maharashtra
  3. Girinagar     –  Gujarat
  4. Sthanesvara   –  Uttar Pradesh

  Which of the pairs given above are correctly matched?

  A 1 and 3 only ✔
  B 1 and 4 only
  C 2 and 3 only
  D 2 and 4 only


2019

Q24. Building 'Kalyaana Mandapas' was a notable feature in the temple
construction in the kingdom of

  A Chalukya
  B Chandela
  C Rashtrakuta
  D Vijayanagara ✔


Q25. In which of the following relief sculpture inscriptions is
'Ranyo Ashoka' (King Ashoka) mentioned along with the stone portrait of Ashoka?

  A Kanganahalli ✔
  B Sanchi
  C Shahbazgarhi
  D Sohgaura


Q26. Which one of the following is not a *Harappan site*?

  A Chanhudarp
  B Kot Djii
  C Sohgaura ✔
  D Desalpur


Q27. Consider the following:

  Deification of the Buddha.
  Treading the path of Bodhisattvas
  Image worship and rituals.

  Which of the above is/are the feature/features of Mahayana Buddhism?

  A 1 only
  B 1 and 2 only
  C 2 and 3 only
  D 1, 2 and 3 ✔


Q28. With reference to forced labour (Vishti) in India during the Gupta period,
which one of the following statements is correct?

  A It was considered a source of income for the State,
    a sort of tax paid by the people. ✔
  B It was totally absent in the Madhya Pradesh and Kathiawar regions
    of the Gupta Empire.
  C The forced labourer was entitled to weekly wages.
  D The eldest son of the labourer was sent as the forced labourer


2018

Q29. Consider the following pairs :

  Craft                Heritage of

  1. Puthukkuli shawls   - Tamil Nadu
  2. Sujni embroidery    - Maharashtra
  3. Uppada Jamdani saris - Karnataka

  Which of the pairs given above is/are correct?

  A 1 only ✔
  B 1 and 2 only
  C 3 only
  D 2 and 3 only


Q30. The well-known painting "Bani Thani" belongs to the

  A Bundi school
  B Jaipur school
  C Kangra school
  D Kishangarh school ✔

Q31. With reference to cultural history of India, consider the following statements :

  Most of the Tyagaraja Kritis are devotional songs in praise of Lord Krishna.
  Tyagaraja created several new ragas.
  Annamacharya and Tyagaraja are contemporaries.
  Annamacharya kirtanas are devotional songs in praise of Lord Venkateshwara.

  Which of the statements given above are correct?

  A 1 and 3 only
  B 2 and 4 only ✔
  C 1, 2 and 3 only
  D 2, 3 and 4 only


Q32. With reference to the religious practices in India, the "Sthanakvasi" sect belongs to

  A Buddhism
  B Jainism ✔
  C Vaishnavism
  D Shaivism


Q33. With reference to Indian history, who among the following is a future Buddha,
yet to come to save the world?

  A Avalokiteshvara
  B Lokesvara
  C Maitreya ✔
  D Padmapani


2017

Q34. With reference to the difference between the culture of Rigvedic Aryans and
Indus Valley people, which of the following statements is/are correct?

  Rigvedic Aryans used the coat of mail and helmet in warfare whereas the people
  of Indus Valley Civilization did not leave any evidence of using them.
  Rigvedic Aryans knew gold, silver am copper whereas Indus Valley people knew
  only copper and iron.
  Rigvedic Aryans had domesticated the horse whereas there is no evidence of
  Indus Valley people having been aware of this animal.

  Select the correct answer using the code given below:

  A 1 only
  B 2 and 3 only
  C 1 and 3 only ✔
  D 1, 2 and 3


Q35. With reference to Manipuri Sankirtana, consider the following statements :

  It is a song and dance performance.
  Cymbals are the only musical instruments used in the performance.
  It is performed to narrate the life and deeds of Lord Krishna.

  Which of the statements given above is/ are correct?

  A 1, 2 and 3
  B 1 and 3 only ✔
  C 2 and 3 only
  D 1 only


Q36. With reference to the religious history of India, consider the following statements:

  Sautrantika and Sammitiya were the sects of Jainism.
  Sarvastivadin held that the constituents of phenomena were not wholly
  momentary, but existed forever in a latent form.

  Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

  A 1 only
  B 2 only ✔
  C Both 1 and 2
  D Neither 1 nor 2


Q37. The painting of Bodhisattva Padmapani is one of the most famous and oft-illustrated paintings at

  A Ajanta ✔
  B Badami
  C Bagh
  D Ellora


Q38. Consider the following pairs :

  Traditions               Communities

  1. Chaliha Sahib Festival  - Sindhis
  2. Nanda Raj Jaat Yatra    - Gonds
  3. Wari-Warkari            - Santhals

  Which of the pairs given above is/are correctly matched?

  A 1 only ✔
  B 2 and 3 only
  C 1 and 3 only
  D None of the above


Q39. Which of the following is/are famous for Sun temples?

  Arasavalli
  Amarakantak
  Omkareshwar

  Select the correct answer using the code given below

  A 1 only ✔
  B 2 and 3 only
  C 1 and 3 only
  D 1, 2 and 3

2016

Q40. With reference to the religious history of India, consider the following statements:

  The concept of Bodhisattva is central to Hinayana sect of Buddhism.
  Bodhisattva is a compassionate one on his way to enlightenment.
  Bodhisattva delays achieving his own salvation to help all sentient beings on their path to it.

  Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

  A 1 only
  B 2 and 3 only ✔
  C 2 only
  D 1, 2 and 3


Q41. What is/are common to the two historical places known as *Ajanta* and *Mahabalipuram*?

  Both were built in the same period.
  Both belong to the same religious denomination.
  Both have rock-cut monuments.

  Select the correct answer using the code given below.

  A 1 and 2 only
  B 3 only ✔
  C 1 and 3 only
  D None of the statements given


Q42. With reference to the cultural history of India, the memorizing of chronicles,
dynastic histories and epic tales was the profession of who of the following?

  A Shramana
  B Parivraajaka
  C Agrahaarika
  D Maagadha ✔


Q43. Consider the following pairs :

  Famous place      Region

  1. Bodhgaya        : Baghelkhand
  2. Khajuraho       : Bundelkhand
  3. Shirdi          : Vidarbha
  4. Nasik (Nashik)  : Malwa
  5. Tirupati        : Rayalaseema

  Which of the pairs given above are correctly matched?

  A 1, 2 and 4 only
  B 2, 3, 4 and 5 only
  C 2 and 5 only ✔
  D 1, 3, 4 and 5 only


Q44. Which one of the following books of ancient India has the love story of the son
of the founder of Sunga dynasty?

  A Swapnavasavadatta
  B Malavikagnimitra ✔
  C Meghadoota
  D Ratnavali


2015

Q45. With reference to the art and archaeological history of India,
which one among the following was made earliest?

  A Lingaraja Temple at Bhubaneswar
  B Rock-cut Elephant at Dhauli ✔
  C Rock-cut Monuments at Mahabalipuram
  D Varaha Image at Udayagiri


2014

Q46. Which of the following Kingdoms were associated with the life of the Buddha?

  Avanti
  Gandhara
  Kosala
  Magadha

  Select the correct answer using the code given below.

  A 1, 2 and 3 only
  B 2 and 4 only 
  C 3 and 4 only
  D 1, 3 and 4 only ✔


Q47. Every year, a monthlong ecologically important campaign/festival is held
during which certain communities/tribes plant saplings of fruit-bearing trees.
Which of the following are such communities/tribes?

  A Bhutia and Lepcha
  B Gond and Korku ✔
  C Irula and Toda
  D Sahariya and Agariya


Q48. With reference to the cultural history of India, the term ‘*Panchayatan*’ refers to

  A an assembly of village elders
  B a religious sect
  C a style of temple construction ✔
  D an administrative functionary


Q49. Which one of the following pairs does not form part of the *six systems of Indian Philosophy*?

  A Mimamsa and Vedanta
  B Nyaya and Vaisheshika
  C Lokayata and Kapalika ✔
  D Sankhya and Yoga


Q50. The national motto of India, ‘*Satyameva Jayate*’ inscribed below the
Emblem of India is taken from

  A Katha Upanishad
  B Chandogya Upanishad
  C Aztareya Upanishad
  D Mundaka Upanishad ✔


Q51. Chaitra 1 of the national calendar based on the Saka Era corresponds to
which one of the following dates of the Gregorian calendar in a normal year of
365 days?

  A 22nd March (or 21st March) ✔
  B 15th May (or 16th May)
  C 31st March (or 30th March)
  D 21st April (or 20th April)


Q52. Consider the following statements

  ‘Bijak’ is a composition of the teachings of Saint Dadu Dayal.
  The Philosophy of Pushti Marg was propounded by Madhvacharya.

  Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

  A 1 only
  B 2 only
  C Both 1 and 2
  D Neither 1 nor 2 ✔


Q53. With reference to Buddhist history, tradition and culture in India,
consider the following pairs :

  Famous shrine                          Location
  Tabo monastery and temple complex      Spiti Valley
  Lhotsava Lhakhang temple, Nako         Zanskar Valley
  Alchi temple complex                   Ladakh complex

  Which of the pairs given above is/are correctly matched?

  A 1 only
  B 2 and 3 only
  C 1 and 3 only ✔
  D 1, 2 and 3


2013

Q54. Some Buddhist rock-cut caves are called Chaityas, while the others are
called Viharas. What is the difference between the two?

  A Vihara is a place of worship, while Chaitya is the dwelling place of the monks
  B Chaitya is a place of worship, while Vihara is the dwelling place of the monks ✔
  C Chaitya is the stupa at the far end of the cave, while Vihara is the hall axial to it
  D There is no material difference between the two


Q55. Which one of the following describes best the concept of Nirvana in Buddhism?

  A The extinction of the flame of ✔
  B The complete annihilation of self
  C A state of bliss and rest
  D A mental stage beyond all comprehension desire


Q56. Which of the following characterizes/characterize the people of the
Indus Valley Civilization?

  They possessed great palaces and temples.
  They worshipped both male and female deities.
  They employed horse-drawn chariots in warfare.

  Select the correct statement/statements using the codes given below.

  A 1 and 2 only
  B 2 only ✔
  C 1, 2 and 3
  D None of the statements given above is correct


Q57. Which of the following statements is/are applicable to Jain doctrine?

  The surest way of annihilating Karma is to practice penance.
  Every object, even the smallest particle has a soul.
  Karma is the bane of the soul and must be ended.

  Select the correct answer using the codes given below.

  A 1 only
  B 2 and 3 only
  C 1 and 3 only
  D 1, 2 and 3 ✔


Q58. The Chinese traveller Yuan Chwang (Hiuen Tsang) who visited India recorded
the general conditions and culture of India at that time. In this context,
which of the following statements is/are correct?

  The roads and river-routes were completely immune from robbery.
  As regards punishment for offences, ordeals by fire, water and poison were
  the instruments for determining the innocence or guilt of a person.
  The tradesmen had to pay duties at ferries and barrier stations.

  Select the correct answer using the codes given below.

  A 1 only
  B 2 and 3 only ✔
  C 1 and 3 only
  D 1, 2 and 3

